hey just spending some more quality time
with mao zedong a lot of my life still
involves legacy of communism and I have
written in the past about cult phenomena
within political organizations such as
communism and within Buddhism religious
cult phenomena I've done a lot of
reading about cults into various
headings and sometimes I see Google
search results for my name that actually
reflect that where like I'm googling my
own name to try to find an article I
published in the past and getting
results for robert jay lifton you know
his analysis of the cult definition of
what a cult is and so on suddenly I've
been interested in for a long time just
lately there have been controversies
leading vegans to ask questions about
cult phenomena and veganism to what
extent veganism is a cult or might
become a cult etc most of those
questions are not of course being a
sincerely but you can do the following
thought experiment to very rapidly
ascertain just how much potential there
is Indy how inevitable it is that we're
gonna get cult phenomena within veganism
and not just because I mean it as much
as vegans or regular people it's
inevitable that someone in the NFL is
vegan so many plays football is vegan
someone famous and the military is vegan
any lifestyle choice of this kind will
inevitably have luminaries and
inevitably also there will be some
famous criminal who turns out to be
vegan just in as much as the vegan diet
becomes part of the mainstream if not
any particular shade of the vegan
ideology we've already seen that so in
that sense you might say cults are
inevitable but ask yourself this
question if I offered you an apartment
for rent which is identical to the
apartment you're currently living in in
every way
except everyone in the apartment
building is vegan and the closest corner
store closes little grocery store
because of this is also 100% vegan
would you pay $100 more in rent per
month to live in that apartment building
instead of the apartment building you've
already got now if you're watching this
and you're not vegan it's still a pretty
easy thought experiment to do right it's
still pretty easy to think through how
that decision would affect you or what
would appeal to you above it if you
would would you do it for $200 would you
do it for $300
how much more rent would you pay to live
in exactly the same circumstances except
that you're in an exclusively vegan
community once you've got that impulse
in place you've actually already got all
the ingredients you need for cult
phenomena to erupt don't believe me
here's the same problem stated in
different terms if I would offer you a
job it's the exact same job that you
already have in every way whatever your
job is I'm offering you a different
employer that's completely identical
except everyone you work with is vegan
and the nearest lunchtime cafeteria at
lunchtime restaurant that sort of thing
for the same reason is also all be would
you switch jobs if it lowered your
salary by a hundred dollars a month
would you do it for two hundred dollars
a month three hundred how much lower
an income would you accept to be in the
same job but surrounded by their vegans
completely human impulse completely
natural tendency involved here and you
see it play out even with very moderate
religious groups the type of Judaism we
have within Canada is on the whole
pretty moderate indeed pretty boring
it's not the stuff that you would expect
cults to be made of and get in practice
it is and I remember we had a
controversy in Toronto because local
organized Jewish groups had set up their
own bus company a a Jewish only bus
company so that people taking the bus
between Toronto and New York would be
able to ride on a bus that was
exclusively Jewish people on the bus
Jewish passengers now this gets into
questions of racism and segregation and
what-have-you I think there are a lot of
questions raised there but that bus
company actually it did not become
controversial because the government the
Government of Canada didn't express an
interest in it other bus companies
raised a legal complaint about unfair
competition and that in effects all bus
companies ought to be able to compete
for the Jewish market freely and openly
and fairly and instead this was closing
off part of the market to competition
obviously you get into really difficult
questions I grew up in Toronto Jewish
people consider me Jewish I consider
myself an atheist but obviously in terms
of ethnicity and other criteria there
still is a sense in which I'm Jewish
going to an only Jewish retirement home
problematic just these questions of
racism and segregation Jewish only
schools is that really what's good for
people and so on as soon as you have
people willing to make those sacrifices
separate themselves
you have all the ingredients you need
for cult phenomena I've read about and
studied many many different cults one I
remember recently I saw some here on
YouTube I saw some video interviews of
the people after the cult had fallen
apart and they said very sympathetically
look we made all these sacrifices just
to live in this community a plan the
community with like-minded people that's
something so precious to us that was the
only reward you know they obviously they
paid a lot of money but also they had to
kind of wear strange clothes and obey
all these strange rules but the one
reward what they got out of it was
living surrounded by like-minded people
and whoever you are watching this video
you may not have ever experienced that
in your life depending on what country
and what culture you come from you may
not know the deep instincts so called
tribal instincts whatever you want to
say you may not know the type of
gratification in the human ego and the
human heart that this appeals to but it
is so deeply rooted that as soon as you
reach out to people and start
manipulating them in this way
not only are they willing to make
financial sacrifices but that that
communitarian mentality can pretty
quickly take over so uh yeah it's coming
I mean as I said before yes it's
inevitable that we have sports heroes
who are vegan and I know singers and
musicians and actors and actresses it's
maybe also inevitable we're gonna have a
mass murderer who's vegan we're gonna
have some kind of infamous hated public
figures vegan if it hasn't happened
already it's coming and for all to human
reasons I can completely sympathize the
reasons it's inevitable that vegans are
going to form into a diversity of
communes shall we say and some of them
are going to go into that pattern that
we've seen play out again and again with
cults